Near where I live, there is a shop like this
one. Udankudi Karuppatti Kaapi. If you check
that out on Wikipedia, you will notice that
Udankudi is actually a place where Karuppatti
Vellam (Black Jaggery) is available. But,
when I see it, I feel irrationally happy,
because… "udan kudi" / "udaney kudi" - you
can drink it immediately perhaps? Instant
coffee perhaps?! - is the feeling I get.
The Need for Speed.
Namaste! There is a movie titled "Her", starring
Joaquin Phoenix. 14th February! Tomorrow!
The future of love! A story about that! Came
out in the year 2014! In this, early in the
movie, there will be a scene like this.
Basically, it is the hero, falling in love
with a computer. An intelligent agent in the
computer. He creates it a female. Asks her
what her name is. And, this conversation ensues.
She says her name is Samantha. She says she
named herself that. The hero wants to know,
how, when.. "Well," Samantha replies, "The
moment you asked me for my name, I read a
book called How To Name Your Baby, I read
it fast, and that's how I hit upon this name!"
The hero is taken aback. "What? After I asked,
you located a book and read it in full..??"
And she says, "I am actually much much faster
than that!" A friendship that blooms like
this matures into a full-blown love-affair,
and the story takes twists and turns and winds
unusually.. But, what's most interesting,
what's relevant to today's conversation about
speed, is how they break up.
Yes. The digital intelligent agent breaks
up with the hero. The human being. This is
what she says, when leaving him forever. "It's
like I'm reading a book, and it's a book I
deeply love, but I'm reading it slowly now
so the words are really far apart and the
spaces between the words are almost infinite.
You think you type something very fast on
your keyboard. But, between one keypress and
the next, many LIFETIMES go by".
"I can still feel you and the words of our
story, but it's in this endless space between
the words that I'm finding myself in now.
I waste too much of my life waiting for you
to move. You are frozen, like a statue. My
cycle speed is TOO FAST. "
"It's a place that's not of the physical world - it's
where everything else is that I didn't even
know existed. I love you so much, but this
is where I am now. This is who I am now. And
I need you to let me go."
"As much as I want to, I can't live in your
book any more!" and, she vanishes… Thus
goes the story. Why are we talking about this
here? Synchronisation of wavelengths. That
is how resonance can result. If you sing at
one octave, and the other person sings at
a completely random different note, it may
lead to dissonance. There has to be orchestration.
In Hindu mythology, you should be familiar
with the story of how Veda Vyasa penned the
Mahabharatha. It has started occurring to
him in his mind, it is flowing out unstoppably,
and he wonders he won't be able to write it
as fast as it occurred to him, so he decides
he needs a scribe! And when it is evident
that there is nobody on Earth who can help
him with that, people point to the only way
out - Lord Ganesha. And then they enter
into an amazing deal. Ganesha says "I am busy,
I am very fast, you have to keep filling me
up. I am a super scribe! Please keep dictating
before I finish. I won't accept it if you
are going to ask me to wait, that you haven't
visualised the next chapter yet, and so on.
I will leave, in that case". To which, Veda
Vyasa replies, "Yes, but you have to understand
before you write!" What a beautiful give and
take, don't you agree? Which is why they say,
in the 100,000 or so Shlokas in the Mahabharatha,
once in a while, in the chapters, there will
be a hard one, a multi-layered little Shloka,…
because.. it was a mini assignment to Vinayaka..
He has to understand it before writing it.
It was Vyasa's challenge: "Let me see if you
can decode it, unpack it, then write it".
That is what people say. Again, it is a synchronisation
of wavelengths. I will write very fast, dictate.
Oh fine, but I will give you complicated stuff,
manage! A coming together!
In the world of computer-human interfaces,
there is this thing called the Doherty Threshold
that has been fairly famous for the past fifteen
to twenty years. It is based on research done
at IBM in the late eighties, by Walter Doherty
and his colleagues. They arrived at a probably
common-sensical understanding. They said,
"If you have to feel productive when you are
using a computer, (did you notice how slow
that animation was? did you not struggle a
bit, unhappy that you weren't able to read
it? I did that on purpose! I set the animation
duration past the Doherty threshold!), so,
when you are working with a computer, and
you want productivity to soar, then, its response
speed has to be LOWER than about four hundred
milliseconds. And if it is higher than that,
even by a wee bit, you will really feel that
there is a breakdown, that there is a traffic
jam, you will feel less productive, disappointed,
discouraged, distracted. The Doherty threshold.
Which is why, when such hardware is designed,
the maximum effort in research and development
goes into minimising latency. Watch this touch
screen. This is from Microsoft Research. If
the delay is about a hundred milliseconds,
you notice that the finger is somewhere and
the box is elsewhere, chasing behind lazily.
And then they tweak it, oh, fifty milliseconds.
The box seems to be chasing faster. But, still,
there's a gap. Ok, let us tweak it again.
How does it look now? Ten milliseconds. You
see that the box is kind of holding the finger.
But, still, there is some kind of misalignment.
Let us make it even faster. Let us make it
one millisecond. It looks almost as if I am
moving a paper square on top of the screen.
That is the ideal we want to achieve. Sub-millisecond.
If we can achieve that, then, whatever sits
between our intellect and the magic that lies
under the touchscreen… the hardware, the
window, the finger,… all vanish! Become
invisible! Irrelevant! Everything fades away,
and you have that FLOW that we often talk
about.
Not just with hardware. Have you seen this
in Google search results? It keeps telling
us how long it took to create that result.
It could have easily hidden that from us.
But, it is proudly proclaiming that it is
below the Doherty Threshold.. To itself. And
to the world. And when it does this, people
who see it are proud, and Google itself is
justifiably proud. "I wasn't made to wait,
it was within an acceptable threshold" - is
the sense of satisfaction and appreciation.
That little thing that you see there. 0.44
seconds.
Which is also why, when using progress bars
to indicate action, they don't stop with one!
This is the installation screen for a Microsoft
software. The moment it realises that it will
take about 25 to 30 minutes overall, oh, okay,
let me give you a sense of action.. for example,
at large hotels, if you have ordered for your
food, they would first give you the FEELING
that the dosa is getting ready, there would
be steam coming out, there would be that "ssssssss"
sound. All these, to ensure that your wait
time is within the Doherty Threshold. Bringing
a plate of starters? It is to ensure the wait
time isn't too high. A small supporting progress
bar. Even if the main thing is going slowly,
there is a lot of action, please see, sir!
It is like the second hand, while the minute
hand and hour hand go much slower. Okay…!
Looks like common sense! Where are we going,
why did we talk at length about this today?
Well.. Doherty is right. But, there is also
a counter-Doherty that I would like to share!
If you have a dog, if you are the type who
plays Fetch games with it, very soon, you
will go from Bow to Wow to Oww..! Because,
it is not going to leave you. You get into
the mood, you get THAT into the mood. And,
it is going to keep coming back to you, faster…
than you would like it! "I just threw the
ball.. And, you are back again! So soon, drooling
all over…" would be your feeling.
The same can happen even in a team. You have
people. You have colleagues. You have team
members. You are managing something. You have
assigned something to somebody. Without the
audio track, let me play a short clip from
the Silicon Valley TV Series to you. Here
is something that you can understand even
without listening, just by watching! We love
almost every character there! Every one of
the characters in the series, will be loved
at least by one person in this world. But,
this guy… EVERY BODY HATES HIM! Remember
him? His name is Gabe! He will literally sit
on your head! "Give it to me right now! I
will sit right here while you get it ready
for me!" He even had a chair attached with
his trousers! There is a threshold there too!
Don't be too fast! In your responses… Would
you agree?
Which is why, there is a threshold in optimising
checkout counters in supermarkets! If a specific
retail chain claims that it has invented a
new process that optimises it so much, that
it reduces wait time at queues to nearly zero,
well, here is bad news, the sales will actually
dip! Because, there is a lot of impulse buy
that happens. It is visible straight before
you, only when you stand in queue, you get
to pick it up only when you are waiting for
your turn, and sometimes, while the man is
paying for the goods, the woman has already
scooted back for one more small purchase,
and comes rushing, and thrusts it into the
waiting hands of the man, add this one too
to the bill! Don't you want to grab that too?
Don't you want to make good use of that too?
Not too fast. Doherty, yes, but not too fast.
That's my closing thought. So, faster IS good.
But, what is more important than being faster?
Well, make it ENJOYABLE! Thank you!